---
title: Touch Assessment Workshop

event: Registration
event_url: https://shop.bham.ac.uk/conferences-and-events/college-of-life-environmental-sciences/school-of-psychology/psychology-conferences/touch-assessment-workshop-registration

location: Room 120 Hills Building - University of Birmingham
address:
  street: Edgbaston
  city: Birmingham
  region: ''
  postcode: B15 2TT
  country: United Kingdom

summary: ''
abstract: 'On Wednesday 15 March 2023 9:00-17:00 SyMoN (Sensory Motor Neuroscience) Lab is running a Touch Assessment Workshop in the Hills Building at the University of Birmingham. The Hills Building is 5 minutes walk from University train station which is served by 5 trains an hour from New St (journey time 10 minutes).
The workshop will comprise a series of talks in the morning with lots of opportunity for questions, followed by demos, lab tours and a closing panel discussion in the afternoon. There will also be an opportunity for those attending to present posters. The morning presentations will have a practical focus and will be aimed mainly at therapists and clinicians although we expect that researchers in behavioural science and engineering not familiar with touch measurement methods will also be interested. The charge for the day will be a nominal Â£30 towards the cost of coffee and a buffet lunch. Numbers will be limited to 50 people.'

# Talk start and end times.
#   End time can optionally be hidden by prefixing the line with `#`.
date: '2023-03-15T09:00:00Z'
date_end: '2023-03-15T17:00:00Z'
all_day: false

# Schedule page publish date (NOT talk date).
publishDate: '2023-01-30T00:00:00Z'

authors: []
tags: []

# Is this a featured talk? (true/false)
featured: false

image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: Right

url_code: ''
url_pdf: ''
url_slides: ''
url_video: ''

# Markdown Slides (optional).
#   Associate this talk with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides:

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.


#Slides can be added in a few ways:

#- **Create** slides using Wowchemy's [_Slides_](https://wowchemy.com/docs/managing-content/#create-slides) feature and link using `slides` parameter in the front matter of the talk file
#- **Upload** an existing slide deck to `static/` and link using `url_slides` parameter in the front matter of the talk file
#- **Embed** your slides (e.g. Google Slides) or presentation video on this page using [shortcodes](https://wowchemy.com/docs/writing-markdown-latex/).

#Further event details, including page elements such as image galleries, can be added to the body of this page.


projects:
---

**Programme**

**UOB Discussion Group on Mobile/phone/home-based cognitive and
behavioural assessment.**

Tues 14 March 12:30-17:30

**Room 1.20 Hills Building, University of Birmingham**

Aim

Many behavioural tests, especially those concerned with touch and
sensory motor function involve manual administration. This raises issues
about test sensitivity and bias. It is also labour intensive requiring
trained testers and can make it difficult to compare results across
separate sessions with different testers. The purpose of this discussion
group is to review progress being made to develop automated adaptive
testing procedures for cognitive and behavioural assessment and consider
the extent to which they afford remote testing.

Draft programme

12:30 **Coffee -- bring your own sandwiches**

13:15 Overview: Alan Wing followed by ...

Introductions (5 minutes and 2-slides with background for each person)

14:15 Presentations of illustrative ongoing or completed projects: 10-15
minutes each with slides; please tell me a.m.wing@bham.ac.uk if you have
a case study you would like to share). Suggested topics received to
date:\
Ken Valyear: Experiences with sending out the touch localisation test
for home testing during the pandemic.

Susan Li: Pandemic testing of wet and dry touch using student home
bubbles.

Alan Wing: Nori Jacoby's approach to web-based timing studies
https://www.norijacoby.com/2021.01.15.426897v4.full.pdf

Becca Hirst: SME perspective TBC

15:00 Break out groups

(3-4 topics eg phone apps, training carers as experimenters, using zoom)

16:00 **Tea**

16:30 Break out groups report back followed by Discussion

17:15 Closing comments: Alan Wing

**18:00 Dinner**. We are booking a table at Blue Piano in nearby
Edgbaston <https://www.thebluepiano.co.uk/> Please let me know if you
would like to join us.

Attendees

1\) Harriet Allen Psychology, University of Nottingham

2\) Christina Jerosch-Herold, Professor of Rehabilitation Research,
School of Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich

3\) Ken Valyear, Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor), School of Human
and Behavioural Sciences, Bangor University (**via** **zoom**)

4\) Olivier Lambercy, Rehabilitation Engineering Lab, ETH, Zurich

5\) Rebecca Hirst, Open Science Tools Ltd, Nottingham

6\) Diar Abdlkarim, Obi Robotics Ltd, Birmingham

7\) Alan Wing, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham

8\) Roberta Roberts, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of
Psychology, University of Birmingham

9\) Max Di Luca, Reality Lab, School of Psychology, University of
Birmingham.

10\) Ali Khatibi, Center of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain,
School of Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of
Birmingham

11\) Nick Holmes, School of Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Birmingham

12\) Fiona Newell, School of Psychology and Institute of Neuroscience in
Trinity College Dublin

13\) Susan Li, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of Psychology





**Touch Assessment Workshop at SyMoN Lab**

Wed 15 March 9:00-17:00

**Room 1.20 Hills Building, University of Birmingham**

In case of travel issues preventing attendance, please ask for the zoom link for the morning session


9:00 **Registration**

9:15 Alan Wing: Welcome and overview

9.20-11:00 **Talks session A** (chair: Tina
Jerosch-Herold)

 T1. Alan Wing: Discriminative touch: neurophysiology and behaviour

 T2. Nick Holmes: Primary somatosensory cortex and brain stimulation

 T3. Fiona Newell: Cross-sensory interactions in tactile perception

 T4. Ali Khatibi: Central sensitisation and pain processing in chronic
 conditions

 T5. Max Di Luca: Touch in virtual reality.

**11-11:20 Coffee and posters**

11:20-13:00 **Talks session B** (chair: Alan Wing)

 T6. Harriet Allen: Multisensory touch and aging

 T7. Olivier Lambercy: Robot assessment of proprioception

 T8. Ken Valyear: Measuring touch localisation: A new research tool.
 (**via Zoom**)

 T9. Christina Jerosch-Herold: Assessing touch in a clinical setting

 T10. Francis McGlone: A tale of two touches

**13:00-14:00 Lunch and posters**

14:00-15.30 **Lab tours with demos**

8 stations on a 10 minute rotation 6 people per group

 D1) Becca Hirst Open Science Tools - **Foyer**

 D2) Ali Khatibi Quantitative Sensory Test (QST) - **Seminar room
 (H121)**

 D3) Diar Abdlkarim Obi robotics - **Symonlab (H324)**

 D4) Roberta Roberts Adaptive tactile testing system - **Symonlab
 (H324)**

 D5) Susan Li Mirror box - **Posture lab (H229)**

 D6) Max Di Luca VR Delta - **Posture lab (H229)**

 D7) Al Loomes Grating roughness, skin compliance --
 **Neurorehabilitation (Kitchen) Lab (H224)**

 D8) Nick Holmes Grating orientation test - **Foyer**

**15:30-16:00 Tea and posters**

16:00 **Closing discussion** (chair: Alan Wing)

 Andy Bremner, Aidan Adkins, Harriet Allen, Olivier Lambercy, Becca Hirst

17:00 **Depart**


**Touch Assessment Workshop: Room 1.20, Hills Building, University of
Birmingham**


**Workshop speakers**

T1) **Alan Wing**, Professor of Human Movement, Sensory Motor
Neuroscience Lab, School of Psychology, University of Birmingham.

**Discriminative touch: neurophysiology and behaviour**: When people
categorise objects by touch they tend to use stereotyped "exploratory
procedures" such as rubbing or pressing the finger to feel surface
smoothness or softness. In my talk I will review the interaction between
skin biomechanics and neurophysiology of tactile receptors that pick up
cues to surface roughness from sliding or static contact. The perception
of surface roughness is important both for appreciation of object
qualities and in determining friction and grip when handling objects. I
will finish my talk with a consideration of cortical processing of touch
roughness information for perception and action.

Bio: Alan is Professor of Human Movement at the University of
Birmingham. His first degree in Psychology at University of Edinburgh
was followed by a PhD on movement timing at McMaster University in
Canada and a postdoc on the same topic at Bell Labs in the USA. He then
joined the staff of the MRC Applied Psychology Unit in Cambridge where
he developed his interests in reactive and predictive control of
movement and neurorehabilitation. He came to University of Birmingham in
1997 when he set up the Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab. His current
funding includes EPSRC Augmented reality music ensemble and BBSRC IAA
Adaptive touch testing system.

T2) **Nick Holmes**, School of Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation
Sciences, University of Birmingham.

**Primary somatosensory cortex and brain stimulation**: The primary
somatosensory cortices (S1) were the first to be numbered (anatomical
regions 1, 2 and 3!) and many researchers have used brain stimulation
methods such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to probe
somatosensory function. In my talk I will relate my experience of trying
to interfere with touch using TMS. In brief: it has not gone to plan.
Apart from concluding that brain stimulation is difficult, we at least
know that S1 is more involved in discriminating between tactile stimuli
than in simply detecting their presence.

Bio: A new member of staff at Birmingham, Nick studies the perception of
touch on the hand and the control of hand movements, mostly using TMS,
behavioural methods, and recording movement and muscle activity. He has
mostly worked with typically-developing adults, but is also interested
in dyspraxia, the effects of brain lesions, and ageing. Before
Birmingham, Nick was in Nottingham, Reading, Jerusalem and Lyon.

T3) **Fiona Newell**: School of Psychology and Institute of Neuroscience
in Trinity College Dublin.

**Cross-sensory interactions in tactile perception**: Sensitivity in
touch underpins our ability to perceive and interact with our
environment. Tactile inputs about objects can be complemented by object
information encoded by other senses, particularly vision. In my talk I
will overview some of our findings on how these cross-sensory
interactions affect perceptual decisions in touch.

Bio: Fiona is a graduate in Psychology from Trinity College Dublin. She
obtained her PhD from the University of Durham, UK. Following
post-doctoral training in various academic institutions including the
Weizmann institute, Israel and the Max Plank Institute for Biological
Cybernetics, Germany she returned to Trinity College in 2000 to take up
a lectureship position in the School of Psychology. She is currently
Professor of Experimental Psychology. Fiona leads the 'Multisensory
Perception and Cognition Group' at the Trinity College Institute of
Neuroscience that conducts investigations into perceptual function in
humans based on vision, touch and audition. Her research funding
currently includes the EU (ICT programme), Science Foundation Ireland,
Health Research Board of Ireland.

T4) **Ali Khatibi**, Center of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain,
School of Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of
Birmingham

**Central sensitisation and pain processing in chronic conditions**:
Many chronic conditions that influence sensory processing (like chronic
pain) are associated with changes in the function and structure of the
central nervous system. These changes can lead to modified pain and
sensory signals processing, leading to further complications. Therefore,
the assessment of changes in the nervous system and the sensitisation in
processing pain and sensory signals enables us to predict some upcoming
complications and categorise patients based on the expected outcome. In
this talk, we review the methods for the assessment of central
sensitisation and evidence of CNS changes associated with them.

Bio: Ali is a senior research fellow in pain and neuroplasticity at the
centre for precision rehabilitation of spinal pain at the University of
Birmingham. He completed PhD in psychology at KU Leuven and postdoctoral
training at the university of Montreal and Montreal Neurological
Institute. His research is focused on the assessment of cognitive bias
in the processing of pain and sensory information and functional and
structural neuroimaging of the human brain and spinal cord.

T5) **Max Di Luca**, Reality Lab, School of Psychology, University of
Birmingham.

**Touch in virtual reality**: In everyday life, humans grasp and
manipulate objects without being aware that such interactions produce
compelling and rich haptic (active touch) signals. Haptics in immersive
VR interactions, instead, employ signals that are much more limited and
could never reach the details of everyday signals. Rather than aiming
for realism, VR haptics should increase believability, utility, and
intuitiveness. Steering away from realistic content allows the creation
of virtual experiences that are otherwise impossible in everyday life
and that are "super" realistic.

Bio: Max performs both fundamental and applied research to investigate
how humans process multisensory stimuli, with a focus on understanding
perception\'s temporal, dynamic, and interactive nature. He uses
psychophysical experiments and neuroimaging methods to capture how the
brain employs sensory information and combines them with assumptions,
predictions, and information obtained through active exploration. He
aims to create computational models that constitute quantitative and
testable theories about the underlying cognitive and neural processes.
He is principal investigator on the EPSRC funded Augmented Reality Music
Ensemble (ARME) project.

T6) **Harriet A Allen**, Professor, School of Psychology, University of
Nottingham

**Multisensory touch and aging**: Texture perception is critical for
wellbeing and function and declines with age but study of it has been
neglected. One way that older adults are likely to compensate for
peripheral sensory change is through capitalising on information
available across several sensory modalities. At the same time, the
signals from other senses, and cognitive function, are also likely to be
changing or degrading. Perception of multisensory events in older adults
is influenced by the reliability of unisensory signals. This talk will
discuss how these different changes and declines affect perception.

Bio: Harriet is Professor in the School of Psychology, University of
Nottingham. She leads the Lifespan Lab project and the Visual Ageing
Lab. She is interested in how attention and perception interact and how
these change through the lifespan.

T7) **Olivier Lambercy**, Rehabilitation Engineering Lab, ETH, Zurich

**Robotic assessment of finger proprioception**: Somatosensory deficits
following neurological injuries are poorly investigated and rarely
addressed during rehabilitation, despite the importance of somatosensory
input in motor learning and control. In this talk I will discuss how
robotic devices can provide complementary solutions to assess
somatosensory impairment, and in particular finger proprioception.
Specifically, I will present the development of the ETH MIKE platform,
and building on the results of our clinical trials, underline how
sensitive and objective digital health metrics can help characterize
proprioception impairments and their evolution in neurological patients.

Bio: Olivier is a Senior Scientist and the co-Director of the
Rehabilitation Engineering Laboratory at ETH Zurich. He obtained the PhD
degree in Mechanical Engineering from the National University of
Singapore in 2009. His research focuses on the development and clinical
application of technological solutions to improve upper limb assessment,
therapy and assistance after neurological injuries.

T8) **Ken Valyear**, Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor), School of
Human and Behavioural Sciences, Bangor University

**Measuring touch localisation: A new research tool**. The ability to
accurately localise touch is important for healthy sensory experience
and movement, and breaks down after various types of injuries and
illnesses. This talk will introduce our lab's recent work in developing
a clinical research tool for the detailed characterisation of touch
localisation on the hand. A next challenge for us is to determine how we
might revise this tool for practical use in the clinic.

Bio: Ken is a brain scientist interested in how the hand and brain
function together. His group uses various methods to characterise hand
and brain function, and understand how they relate. The aim is to
advance new knowledge of the functional interplay between the hand and
brain and use this knowledge to help solve significant clinical
challenges.

T9) **Christina Jerosch-Herold**, Professor of Rehabilitation Research,
School of Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich

**Assessing touch in a clinical setting**: My presentation will focus on
a current framework and methods for assessing recovery of touch function
in patients with sensory nerve disorders of the hand in a clinical
setting. The need for novel technologies and remote methods of
assessment are highlighted especially in the context of more efficient
study designs and what outcomes of surgical and rehabilitative
interventions matter to patients, clinicians and funders.

Bio: Tina started her career as a practising hand therapist where she
developed a particular interest in nerve injuries. Following completion
of a Masters and PhD on clinical assessment methods for peripheral nerve
injuries, she held several NIHR research fellowships that enabled her to
undertake clinical trials and observational studies on carpal tunnel
syndrome and co-developed the I-HaND, a patient-reported outcome measure
for hand nerve disorders.

T10. **Francis McGlone**: Professor of Neuroscience, Research Centre
Brain & Behaviour, Liverpool John Moores University.

**A tale of two touches:** The sensory experience that most of us
associate with touch is interacting with tools, objects, and bumping
into each other as we navigate the physical world. This sense of touch
is dependent on fast conducting A-beta myelinated nerves and their
associated low threshold mechanoreceptors found in the skin, joints and
muscles -- it is discriminative. However, there is a second sense of
touch that is mediated by a population of gentle touch sensitive
c-fibres called c-tactile afferents (CT), discovered in humans by
Swedish neurophysiologists in the late 1980's. CTs, being unmyelinated,
conduct information into the CNS too slowly to have any role in
'detection for action' and are hypothesised to code for the affective /
emotional properties of touch. In this talk I will discuss their role in
shaping the destiny of the social brain.

Bio: Francis is Head of the Somatosensory & Affective Neuroscience group
@ LJMU (<https://somaffect.org>), Visiting Prof at University of
Liverpool and Aarhus University, Finland. His research focus is on
c-fibres, spanning the functional properties of nociceptors,
pruriceptors and latterly 'hedonoceptors'.

**Workshop demonstrators**

D1) **Rebecca Hirst** Open Science Tools, Nottingham

**Conducting cognitive measurements online via PsychoPy and
Pavlovia.org**

**Bio**: Becca is Chief Science Officer and a Director at Open Science
Tools (creators of PsychoPy and Pavlovia.org) as well as a postdoctoral
researcher at Trinity College Dublin. Her own research focuses on
multisensory perception and attention across the lifespan.

D2) **Ali Khatibi** Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Birmingham

**Quantitative Sensory Test (QST)**

Bio: see above

D3) **Diar Abdlkarim** Obi robotics and Reality Lab, School of
Psychology, University of Birmingham

**The obi robotics reach data glove**

Bio: Diar is postdoctoral research fellow on the Augmented Reality Music
Ensemble (ARME) project. He obtained his PhD on Sensorimotor integration
and virtual reality with Chris Miall in 2022.

D4) **Roberta Roberts**, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of
Psychology, University of Birmingham.

**Adaptive tactile testing system**

Bio: Roberta is senior research fellow in Psychology and divides her
time between the Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab and the Motivation and
Social Neuroscience Lab at the University of Birmingham. She obtained
her PhD on Bilateral interactions in kinaesthesia with Glyn Humphreys in
2005.

D5) **Susan Li**, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham.

**Mirror box -- illusory conjunction of vision and touch.**

Bio: Susan is postdoctoral research fellow on the Augmented Reality
Music Ensemble (ARME) project. She obtained her PhD on Multisensory
timing with Max Di Luca in 2018.

D6) **Max Di Luca**, Virtual Reality Lab, School of Psychology, University of
Birmingham.

**Virtual reality with the Delta 3-dof haptic robotic device**

Bio: see above

D7) **Al Loomes**, Sensory Motor Neuroscience Lab, School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham:

**Grating roughness and skin compliance**.

Bio: Al is working on a PhD on aging touch and multisensory roughness
perception with Alan Wing and Harriet Allen as supervisors.

D8) **Nick Holmes**, Sport Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Birmingham

**Grating orientation test**




**Workshop Panel**

**Andy Bremner**
https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/staff/profiles/psychology/bremner-andrewj.aspx

**Aidan Adkins** https://tackleprostate.org/our-people/aidan-adkins/

**Harriet Allen**
https://psychology.nottingham.ac.uk/staff/Harriet.Allen/

**Olivier Lambercy**
https://relab.ethz.ch/laboratory/team/olivier-lambercy.html

**Becca Hirst** https://www.rebeccahirst.org/

**Workshop coordination**

Alan Wing, Denise Clisset, Megan Ashfield, Tadiwa Mbiri, Vojtech Ryp

